---
title: 算法博弈论 W36 Mechanism design basics
author: tinsir888
date: 2023/9/4
cover: /img/AUagt.jpg
katex: true
tags:
  - 笔记
  - 算法博弈论
categories:
  - AUDatalogi
  - 算法博弈论
abbrlink: 74f56f1f
---

会在笔记中记录 Ιωάννης 的搞笑希腊口音的英语

帕拉漏 parallel

显仙秀里 essentially

神拿里欧 scenario

珠 true

多大儿 total

度 two

Auction

- single-item auction
- sponsored search auction

# Single-item auctions

## Scenario

a seller wants to sell an item

n potential buyers (interested in the item, ready to act strategically to get it)

Question: how do we design how the item should be sold?

Intermediate problem: what do the buyers want?

- buyer i has no-negative val $v_i$ of the item
- valuate is private, unknown to other potential buyers and the seller
- utility
  - 0 if buyer doesn't get the item
  - $v_i-p$ if buyer gets the item and pays $p$

## Sealed bid Auction

1. every buyer i submits bid $b_i$ to the seller
2. seller decides who should get the item
3. the seller decides the price of items

## First-price auction

highest bidder gets/wins the item and pays equal to bid

for bidder: difficult to decide how to behave

for seller: difficult to predict what will happen

## Second-price auction

highest bidder wins the item and pays the **second highest bid**

dominant strategy: if it maximizes utility for agent, no matter what other buyers decide to do

dominant strategy is the subset of best response

Theorem: in a second-price auction, every buyer i has as dominant strategy to submit private valuation as bid for the item $b_i=v_i$

Proof?

> Let B be the highest bid among other buyers
>
> 2 cases
>
> 1. $v_i<B$ utility: 0. no incentive to bid $v_i>B$ since it will lead utility to negative.
> 2. $v_i\ge B$ utility: $v_i-B\ge0$

for bidder: easy to decide how to behave

for seller: easy to predict what will happen

Theorem: in second-price auction, truthful bidder is guaranteed non-negative utility

## DSIC

DSIC aka dominant strategy incentive compatible: if truthful bidding is a dominant strategy for every potential buyer i and gives non-negative utility.

efficiency issues

- who gets the item? the highest bidder
- social welfare (the sum of utility of all buyers here equals winner's valuation-winner's pay) maximization

second-price auctions are ideal

- it's DSIC
- it's social welfare maximizing
- it can be implemented in time complexity polynomial (linear)

# Sponsored search auctions

竞价拍卖

## a simple model

k slots: 1, 2, ..., k

advertisers who, for a particular query, wish to have their ad in one of the slots

every slot j has a **click-through-rate** (CTR) $a_j$: how often users watch an ad at j-th slot

CTR of a slot does not depend on the ad hosted

CTRs: $a_1\ge a_2\ge\cdots\ge a_k$

advertiser i: has a private valuation $v_i$ for every click of its ad and values having the ad at slot j as $a_jv_i$

Goals:

- DSIC auction
- social welfare maximization: the tot val of the advertisers for clicks  is as high as possible
- simplicity: low computational complexity

## generalized second-price auction

advertisers: submit bids to Google

Google: interprets the bids as valuations per click and assigns the ad with j-th highest valuation per click to the j-th slot

Google: defines as price $p_j$ per click at slot j the (j+1)-th highest bid



when is welfare maximized?

> when higher a times with higher v

**NOT DSIC!!!** truth-telling here is not dominant strategy (举个很简单的例子就可以证明)

Social welfare maximization? Not necessarily



exercise 2.1 prove that third-price auction is not DSIC

> assume there are 3 bidder with true value 13, 11, 10.
>
> the first guy 13 pay 10.
>
> the second guy's utility is 0, it incentives it to bid higher than 13, which utility will increase to (11-10)=1 i. e. the mechanism encourage telling lies.

