---
title: 算法博弈论 W37 Myerson's lemma
author: tinsir888
date: 2023/9/11
cover: /img/AUagt.jpg
katex: true
tags:
  - 笔记
  - 算法博弈论
categories:
  - AUDatalogi
  - 算法博弈论
abbrlink: ef0daf6b
---

The most important course in AGT.

# Review

Auction

Sponsored search auction's Goals

- DSIC dominant strategies, individual rationality.
- Social welfare maximization.
- Simplicity (w. r. t. complexity)

design of single parameter mechanisms' Goals:

- assuming participants report true preferences, maximize the social welfare
- incentives to the participants to report their true preferences.
- **Myerson's lemma**

# Single Parameter environments

env setup:

- n participants
- participant i has a non-negative private valuation vi for each unit of stuff
- there is a feasible set X that consists of non-negative n-vectors that describe the stuff given to all participants.

## some terms

auction - mechanism

potential buyers/bidder - participants/agents

bids - reports

valuations - valuations

## split to allocation and payments

direct revelation mechanisms:

- the participants report preference vector b. **preference profile**
- **allocation rule** select a feasible allocation vector as a function of the preference profile.
- **payment rule** decide payments vector p as a function of the preference profile

将机制设计分成两个问题：分配问题和支付问题

## participants' behavior

**utility** u of participant i from participation in the mechanism with **allocation rule** x and **payment rule** p for **preference profile** b is:

$u_i(b)=v_ix_i(b)-p_i(b)$

we focus on payment rules that satisfy $p_i(b)\in[0,b_ix_i(b)]$

i.e. 1. participants always pay (never receive payments) 2. voluntary participation for a truthful participant

## allocation rules

an allocation rule x for a single-param env is called **implementable** if there is a payment rule p so that the direct revelation mechanism (x, p) is DSIC.

可执行的意思就是对一个分配规则，存在一个支付方式使得其 DSIC

monotone: an allocation rule x for a single-param env is **monotone** if for every participant i and preference reports $b_{-i}$ by the other participants, **the allocation $x_i(z,b_{-i})$ to participant i is monotone non-decreasing in her report z**.

简单点说，单调性就是出价越高，越能可能得到（更多而不是更少）物品的意思

# Myerson‘s lemma

迈尔森引理

an allocation rule is implementable iff it its monotone.

if the allocation rule x is monotone, then there is a **unique payment rule** so that the direct revelation rule (x, p) is DSIC and $p_i(b)=0$ whenever $b_i=0$

the payment  rule p is given by a specific formula.

## Proof

assume that the allocation rule x is implementable through the payment rule p (mechanism (x, p) is DSIC)

- let $0\le y\le z$, when participant i has private valuation z and misreport y as her preference, the DSIC property implies that $z\cdot x_i(z,b_{-i})-p_i(z,b_{-i})\ge z\cdot x_i(y,b_{-i})-p_i(y,b_{-i})$
- when participant i has private valuation y and misreport z as her preference, the DSIC property implies that $y\cdot x_i(y,b_{-i})-p_i(y,b_{-i})\ge y\cdot x_i(z,b_{-i})-p_i(z,b_{-i})$

- by the two inequalities above: $y\cdot[x_i(z,b_{-i})-x_i(y,b_{-i})]\le p_i(z,b_{-i})-p_i(y,b_{-i})\le z\cdot[x_i(z,b_{-i})-x_i(y,b_{-i})]$

necessary inequalities due to DSIC implies that: $(z-y)\cdot[x_i(z,b_{-i})-x_i(y,b_{-i})]\ge0$.

i. e. the allocation rule x is implementable **only if** it is monotone

when the allocation rule is piece-wise constant 分段常数

- jump in $p_i(\cdot,b_{-i})$ at point $z=z\cdot[jump\ in\ x_i(\cdot,b_{-i})\ at\ z]$

For **general monotone allocation rule**

$\frac{dp_i(z,b_{-i})}{dz}=z\cdot\frac{dx_i(z,b_{-i})}{dz}$

assuming $p_i(0,b_{-i})=0$, the payment rule is given by:

$p_i(b_i,b_{-i})=\int_0^{b_i}z\cdot\frac{dx_i(z,b_{-i})}{dz}dz$ 具体推导很精彩，y 趋近于 z 时夹逼可得。

if allocation rule x is monotone the rule p is defined as

$p_i(b_i,b_{-i})=\int_0^{b_i}z\cdot\frac{dx_i(z,b_{-i})}{dz}dz$

then the direct revelation mechanism (x, p) is DSIC.

- proof using a figure for piece-wise constant allocation rules. 出价-得到物品函数，矩形的上半部分面积就是支付的价格 payment，下半部分就是效用 utility
- total valuation = utility + payment

